---
title: Crystal 1.1.0 is released!
summary: The first post-1.0 release
thumbnail: +
author: beta-ziliani
release_notes: true
---

We are releasing the first post-1.0 release, making efforts to keep our promise of making regular releases each 3 months, a bit delayed because of the [conference](/conference), and with special focus on keeping the language stability. Below we list the most important or interesting changes, without mentioning the several bugfixes. For details visit the [release's notes](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/1.1.0).

## Stats

In this release we included [166 PRs since the 1.0.0 release](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pulls?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3A1.1.0) by 28 contributors. We thank all the effort put into improving the language and its stdlib! ❤️

## Language changes

1. Splats can now be embedded in enumerable literals and in type definitions. A few examples:

```crystal
t1 = {1, 'a'}
t2 = {true, *t1} # => {true, 1, 'a'}
typeof(t2)       # => Tuple(Bool, Int32, Char)

def f1(x : {Bool, *{Int32, Char}}); end
def f2(x : Tuple(Bool, *{Int32, Char})); end

ae = 'a'..'e'
ccae = ['<', *r, '>'] # => ['<', 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', '>']

a = 1..10
b = 5..15

Set{*a, *b} # => Set{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15}
```

2. The type of a while expression is now the union of all break expressions within the body, plus `Nil` if the condition isn't exactly the `true` literal; the while expression returns `nil` if the condition fails. The type of a break expression is computed similarly to a break inside a block or a return (`Nil` if empty, `Tuple` if multiple values).

```crystal
# First the first non-blank line in STDIN
first_non_blank_line =
  while line = gets
    break line unless line.blank?
  end

puts first_non_blank_line
```

## Macros

1. It is possible to access the top level module with the new instance method `@top_level`:

```crystal
FOO = 1
class Foo
    def bar
       {{@top_level.has_constant?("FOO")}}  # true
    end
end
```

2. `NumberLiteral` now includes a `to_number` method to obtain the pure number, without any _stringification_:

```crystal
{{ p 10_u8.id }}  # => 10_u8
{{ p 10_u8.to_number }}  # => 10
```

3. There was a mismatch between the documentation and the code regarding `Path#global?`. The former `Path#global` is now deprecated in favor of `Path#global?`.

4. New macro method `ASTNode#nil?` for querying if an object is the `NilLiteral` or `Nop`.

## Stdlib

There were several changes that are not supposed to have a direct impact on the users. The most important one to note is that to help get better error messages and documentation, several methods were annotated with expected types. Adding typing annotations might break existing code in specific scenarios so, if this happens to you, please let us now. Also, we are growing the native Windows support, requiring several refactors.

### Numeric

1. It is possible to create numbers from different representations using `new`, as in `Float32.new("1.1", whitespace:false)`.

2. New `#positive?` and `#negative?` methods for `Number` and `Time::Span`.

3. New rounding modes for `BigFloat` and `BigDecimal`.

4. `BigRational#**` now works with unsigned int as exponent. 

### Collections

1. New sub/superset checking methods to the `Hash` class (matching the ones in `Set`):
  * `Hash#subset_of?(other : Hash)`
  * `Hash#proper_subset_of?(other : Hash)`
  * `Hash#superset_of?(other : Hash)`
  * `Hash#proper_superset_of?(other : Hash)`

2. New `Steppable` module as a generalized `Number#step`.

3. New `Array#truncate` method to shrink the physical space of an array.

### Crypto

New methods for getting peer certificates and signatures in `OpenSSL` (see [#8005](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/8005) for details).

### Files

Not it is possible to use a `Path` for the methods in `FileUtils`.

### Networking

1. `OAuth2::Client` supports the customization of its `HTTP::Client` node (see [10452](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/10452) for details).

2. New `Socket::Addrinfo#inspect` method to obtain the address's details ([#10775](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pull/10775).

### Runtime

The segfault handler is now implemented in Crystal, in practice meaning that the compilation process of Crystal is simpler: it does not require the former external `libcrystal`.

### Serialization

The Yaml parser now supports `UUID`.


We have been able to do all of this thanks to the continued support of [84codes](https://www.84codes.com/), [Nikola Motor Company](https://nikolamotor.com/) and every other [sponsor](/sponsors). To maintain and increase the development pace, donations and sponsorships are essential. [OpenCollective](https://opencollective.com/crystal-lang) is available for that. Reach out to [crystal@manas.tech](mailto:crystal@manas.tech) if you’d like to become a direct sponsor or find other ways to support Crystal. We thank you in advance!