---
title: Looking through a Crystal the functional types `Maybe` and `Result`
summary: Crystal's typechecker resembles at times that of modern functional languages. We take and Crystallize the two most widely known types from the functional world.
author: beta-ziliani
---

If someone posts a claim "_Crystal is a functional language_", they would be given a grim look. I mean, classes and inheritance are all over the place in the stdlib. Surely it's an object-oriented language, right?

However, language's paradigms are like genders: there are many, and you are not restricted to just have one all the time. And while it's true that Crystal is _mostly_ object-oriented, it has some bits of functional aspects to it.

In the functional world, there are two types that are used a lot, the `Maybe` type (aka `Option`) and the `Result` type. They are very useful to deal with nil objects and exceptions, respectively, and this is why they're present in the stdlibs of modern languages.

In this post I will explain how to code these types in Crystal, and why you might care. I won't expect readers to know these types nor Crystal, and I hope the examples will be simple enough for anybody with basic CS background to be able to follow.

## The `Maybe` type

If I have to say what's the most itchy aspect of dynamic languages, I'd say dealing with nil objects. Unless you use [powerful analyzers](), and struggle with their [false positives](), or do heavy testing of your functions, your program might pop a nil object all of the sudden. And unless you've did some heavy [defensive programming](), your application will certainly crash.

In languages with a type discipline, such as typed functional languages, types identify where those nil objects are, and they force us to consider them. In short: fewer tests needed, little defensive programming required. This is why such languages come with what is known as the `Maybe` type (e.g., [Rust](), [Scala](), [Elm]()).

The idea is the following: when you have an object of a given type, say, a `String`, you know you **have** a string. It can't be nil. And if you _need_ it to be _nillable_, you wrap it in the `Maybe` type: `Maybe(String)`. Crystal doesn't have such type, but have something similar, called _nillable types_. We're going to highlight the differences later.

An example: we are going to receive a string, and according to the case, we're going to respond with another string. If the input string is not one of the expected ones, we return nil:

```crystal
def parse(input : String) : String?
  case input
  when "hello"
    "world"
  when "goodbye"
    "_cruel_ world"
  else
    nil
  end
end
```

Note the `String?` type. This is how we make `String` nillable. When calling this function, we need to handle the situation that the string might not be there:

```crystal
input = gets
response = parse input

case response
when String
  puts response.uppercase
when Nil
  puts "The input provided is invalid: #{input}"
end
```

Raising an exception is a costly operation, not only from the performance perspective, but also in terms of safety. Therefore, in functional languages they are looked down upon, and are only used in exceptional situations that aren't expected to be part of the normal course of an application.

A concrete example: a parser. Let's assume it takes a string and produces an element of some type, say `Ast`. A typical definition could start with

```cr
def parse(input : String) : Ast
```

The problem is what to do if there's an error. In very rare situations `input` can be expected to be a well formed string, even more so if it's generated by a human. Therefore, in the normal execution of an application we _must_ expect things to go wrong. We might be tempted to raise an exception, but then, we put the burden of the users of the function: they must read the documentation or take a guess that it will throw an exception (and which one!).

### Return?

One alternative, widely used in the stdlib, is to use a [nilable type](https://crystal-lang.org/reference/1.6/syntax_and_semantics/type_grammar.html#nilable) in the case of failure. In that case, our function will have the following type:

```cr
def parse(input : String) : Ast?  # Note the ending `?`
```

This has an obvious advantage: the user can't ignore that this function might _not_ return an `Ast`. Safer code! Additionally, the stdlib includes methods for easily handling nilable types (🤓 fact: nilable types are _almost_ [option types](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Option_type)).

However, using a nilable type also has an obvious problem: we can't tell what went wrong.

### Return (the exception)

With [union types](https://crystal-lang.org/reference/syntax_and_semantics/type_grammar.html#union) it's easy to provide information about the issues found in the input provided to our parsing function:

```cr
class ParseException < Exception
  getter issue : String
  getter line : Int32
  getter col : Int32
  
  def initialize(@issue, @line, @col)
  end
end

alias ParseResult = Ast | ParseException

def parse(input : String) : ParseResult
```

Now, when using `parse`, we must consider the exception. This is easy to do with a [case statement](https://crystal-lang.org/reference/1.6/syntax_and_semantics/case.html#union-type-checks):

```cr
case result = parse "this is an example"
in Ast
  puts "yay!"
in ParseException
  STDERR.puts "#{result.issue} at #{result.line}:#{result.col}"
end
```

Note the following: we can easily add other possible exceptions. For instance, if we are reading from a file, might want to make a distinction between file errors and parsing ones, we can add the corresponding exception to the union. And since the `case` (as written above) is _exhaustive_, any missing case will fail at compile time.

### Give me the gun, I want to shoot at my foot

Having to `case` at each returned object might sound like a bit too much. No need to suffer: we can mimic the same idea as with `Nil` and extend the `Object` class with a `pure!` method to _assume_ an object is the pure value and not an exception:

```cr
class Object
  def pure! : self
    self
  end
end

class Exception
  def pure! : NoReturn
    raise self
  end
end
```

With this extension we can now assume a call to `parse` won't fail (or the exception will explode in our face!):

```cr
parse("hello").pure!.to_s + " pure world"
```

### The missing bits

The current status of the stdlib and compiler support is missing two things:

 1. **A more functional stdlib**

    The stdlib pervasively raises exceptions, and besides nilable types, has little support for exceptions-as-values. This can be done in baby-steps, like adding the `Object#pure!` and `Object#chain` methods discussed in this post.

 2. Generic aliases

    Right now, type aliases can't be generic. Therefore, it's currently impossible to define a generic `Result` type of the sort:

```cr
alias Result(T) = T | Exception
```

## First-class functions

What is functional programming without lambdas, aka first-class functions? Of course, Crystal has them!

Let's continue the idea that we developed in the previous section. We have a method that might return an exception, and we want to operate with it. We saw already how to use `case` or the new `Object#pure!`; let's see another interesting way. Say we have a functional interface for `File.read_lines`:

```cr
class File
  def self.read_lines(filename : String) : Array(String) | FileException
    # Code to read the file, returning the exception if there's a problem
  end
end
```

Next, we extend again `Object` and `Exception`, this time to add a new `chain` method that will allow us to chain calls to functions returning exceptions.

```cr
class Object
  def chain(&)
    yield self
  end
end

class Exception
  def chain(&)
    return self
  end
end
```

Together, we can read a file, join its lines, and then parse it with:

```cr
File.read_lines("/tmp/test").chain(&.join.try(&->parse(String)))
```

At first, this might be difficult to parse, in particular for non-crystalists. In essence, `chain` will pass the lines to the block (what's after the first `&`), otherwise it will return the `FileException`. The lines are `join`ed, and the result passed to the `parse` function using the `Object#try` method that simply passes the object to the function. The syntax `&->` allows us to pass a function as argument, when a block is expected.

An alternative form could be using an inline block:

```cr
File.read_lines("/tmp/test").chain {|lines| parse lines.join}
```

## Algebraic Data Types and pattern matching

A union type returning two different types of objects like `ParseResult` is similar in essence to an _algebraic data type_ (ADT). ADTs allow constructing a type from a defined set of _constructors_ or, in our case, objects. That is, we know from the type alias definition that a `ParseResult` can only be an `Ast` or a `ParseException`, and nothing else. This enables a particular form of reasoning called _pattern matching_.

In order to present the main ingredients of working with ADTs we present a problem and compare the OOP solution with the functional one.

### The problem

Let's build the model for `Food`. A `Food` can be either a `Compound` or a `Base` ingredient. For instance, a "chocolate with caramel filling" has cacao, milk, sugar, and caramel, the latter being also a compound of cream, butter, and sugar.

```cr
abstract class Food
  getter name : String

  def initialize(@name)
  end
end

class Base < Food
end

class Compound < Food
  getter ingredients : Array(Food)

  def initialize(name, @ingredients)
    super name
  end
end
```

We want to have a nice printing of this elements overriding `#to_s`. How do we proceed?

### The OOP approach: make each object responsible

The typical OOP pattern is to make each child class responsible:

```cr
class Base < Food
  def to_s(io)
    io << name
  end
end

class Compound < Food
  def to_s(io)
    io << name << " ("
    ingredients.each_with_index do |f, i|
      io << ", " unless i == 0
      f.to_s io
    end
    io << ")"
  end
end
```

Note how we are leaving to the compiler the task of deciding which method to call when calling `f.to_s` for each element in `ingredients` (🤓 fact: Crystal uses [multiple dispatch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_dispatch)).

This pattern has a main advantage: if we extend tomorrow the class of `Food` with another type, we can easily do it without changing any of the existing code.

As a disadvantage, in cases in which we are unlikely going to have more subclasses, this pattern obscures the algorithm: If each subclass lies in different places of a file, or more so, in different files, we need to jump through the code to find precisely what it does.

A simple, _functional_ in style alternative is to use `case` (a simple form of _pattern-matching_).

### The functional approach: pattern-matching

With the `case` statement we can directly code the `#to_s` in `Food`. This is a more general example than what we saw above with `ParseResult`, but this time recusively traversing the structure of a `Food`.

```cr
abstract class Food
  def to_s(io)
    case self
    in Base
      io << name
    in Compound
      io << name << " ("
      self.ingredients.each_with_index do |f, i|
        io << ", " unless i == 0
        f.to_s io
      end
      io << ")"
    end
  end
end
```

The algorithm is now in one place. Note that, in essence, what we're doing is making the multiple dispatch explicit.

## The missing bit: Improved pattern-matching

Right now, pattern-matching is quite basic: it only works on types, and can't be refined to the field values of the object. Consider if we want to distinguish some food. For instance, imagine we have a `#sugar` percentage field in `Compound`, and we want to print a warning when it's above some threshold.  It would be nice to be able to do the following:

```cr
case self
in Compound where self.sugar > Food::SUGAR_ALLOWED
  io << name << " (HIGH IN SUGARS)"
  ... # code to print the ingredients
in Compound
  ... # normal case
in Base
  ... # case for Base
end
```

Also: the exhaustive checker of `case` in the example [requires a case for the abstract class `Food`](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/issues/12796).

## Concluding remarks

Crystal already lets you take good advantage of some functional patterns, and a full functional experience is not that far away. Of course, mature functional languages have years ahead optimizing for such patterns, but that shouldn't worry us: for performance, we can resort to good ol' mutation! That's the beauty of multi-paradigm languages.

Here we also draw attention about what can be done to get a bit closer to the functional paradigm, without giving up the nice OOP, open paradigm of our language.
