---
title: Crystal 1.3.0 is released!
version: 1.3.0
summary:
thumbnail: +
author:
---

We are delivering a new release with several bugfixes and improvements. Below we list the most important or interesting changes, without mentioning the several bugfixes. For details visit the [release's notes](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/1.3.0). Breaking changes are marked with ⚠️.

## Stats

In this release we included [XXX PRs since the 1.2.2 release](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pulls?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3A1.3.0) by XXX contributors. We thank all the effort put into improving the language and its stdlib! ❤️

## Interpreter

## Windows Support

## Unicode

## Syscalls

## Multi-Assign

Multiple assignments got improved in various ways. First, it's possible to take a "splat of elements" in a multi-assignment:

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with array
first, *rest, last = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
first # => 1
rest # => [2, 3, 4]
last # => 5
{% endhighlight %}</div>

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
# Splat in multi-assign with tuple
*rest, last = {"This", 15, 4, "tuple", true}
rest # => {"This", 15, 4, "tuple"}
last # => true
{% endhighlight %}</div>

Second, there's an optional preview feature to detect unbalanced multi-assignments. It can be enabled with the compiler flag `-Dstrict_multi_assign`.

<div class="code_section">{% highlight crystal %}
a, b, c = {1, 2} # Error: index out of bounds for Tuple(Int32, Int32) (2 not in -2..1)
a, b = {1, 2, 3} # Error: cannot assign Tuple(Int32, Int32, Int32) to 2 targets
{% endhighlight %}</div>

⚠️ This second improvement is a breaking change; therefore it's not enabled by default. We encourage using it to detect possible errors in your code. This setting will likely be the default in 2.0. An additional restriction guarded by that flag is that if the right-hand side has a unique element, it must be of type `Indexable` or `Enumerable`.

## Number Autocast

## Improved Numerical Support / Lexing Number Literals

---
We have been able to do all of this thanks to the continued support of [84codes](https://www.84codes.com/), [Nikola Motor Company](https://nikolamotor.com/) and every other [sponsor](/sponsors). To maintain and increase the development pace, donations and sponsorships are essential. [OpenCollective](https://opencollective.com/crystal-lang) is available for that. Reach out to [crystal@manas.tech](mailto:crystal@manas.tech) if you’d like to become a direct sponsor or find other ways to support Crystal. We thank you in advance!
