---
title: Crystal 1.15.0 is released!
version: 1.15.0
date: 2025-01-09
author: straight-shoota
---

We are announcing a new Crystal release 1.15.0 with several new features and bug fixes.

Pre-built packages are available on [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/1.15.0)
and our official distribution channels.
See [crystal-lang.org/install](https://crystal-lang.org/install/) for
installation instructions.

## Stats

This release includes [161 changes since 1.14.1](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/pulls?q=is%3Apr+milestone%3A1.15.0)
by 25 contributors.  We thank all the contributors for all the effort put into
improving the language! ❤️

## Changes

Below we list the most remarkable changes in the language, compiler and stdlib.
For more details, visit the [full changelog](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/1.15.0).

### Breaking

Constants are allowed to start with non-ascii uppercase and titlecase letters.
Previously, only ASCII uppercase letters were valid as first character for the
name of a constant.

This change makes things right, but it could break code that was valid before:
Identifiers starting with non-ascii uppercase or titlecase letters were
previously considered variable names, but are now constant names.
The following example compiles in 1.14 but errors in 1.15:

```cr
Á = 1
Á = 2 # Error: already initialized constant Á
```

Read more in [#15148].

_Thanks , [@nanobowers]_

[#15148]: https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/#15148

### Standard library

[`Iterator(T).empty`] creates an iterator with no elements ([#15039])

_Thanks [@spuun]_

A new method [`Enumerable#find_value`] returns the first truthy block result ([#14893]).

```cr
["", nil, "foo", "bar"].find_value(&.presence) # => "foo"
```

_Thanks [@jgaskins]_

`Log` messages do not emit when issued with a block and the block returns `nil`.
This was incorrectly also the case even when an `exception` instance was passed
to the emit method. This was fixed in [#15253] and a message is now emitted when
an exception is passed. We also added new overloads for passing an exception
without giving a block ([#15257]).

_Thanks [@lachlan]_

The new method [`HTTP::Cookie#expire`] allows expiring a cookie, which
effectively instructs clients to delete it ([#14819]).

_Thanks [@a-alhusaini]_

Traditionally, the regex multiline option [`Regex::CompileOptions::MULTILINE`]
combines the PCRE `MULTILINE` and `DOTALL` options. In some cases you might want
to use multiline matching without `DOTALL`. This is now possible with [`Regex::CompileOptions::MULTILINE_ONLY`] ([#14870]).

_Thanks [@ralsina]_

#### Lifetime EventLoop

https://crystal-lang.org/2024/11/05/lifetime-event-loop/

Refactor Lifetime Event Loop ([#14996], [#15205], [#15206], [#15215])

In the process we also refactored the `Crystal::EventLoop` namespace ([#15226]),
and some details of the `libevent` ([#15243]) and IOCP event loop drivers ([#15238]).

This effort is part of the ongoing [project to improve multi-threading support](/2024/02/09/84codes-manas-mt)
with the help of [84codes].
We've started to integrate multi-threaded execution contexts from [`ysbaddaden/execution_context`](https://github.com/ysbaddaden/execution_context)
into the standard library, implementing [RFC 2](https://github.com/crystal-lang/rfcs/pull/2).
We expect this to become available in the next release.

_Thanks [@ysbaddaden]_

#### Stabilized platform support

In the process of testing the event loop implementations across platforms we
updated specs and fixed some smaller issues with platform support on operating
systems without automated continuous testing (OpenBSD, FreeBSD, Dragonfly BSD
and NetBSD).

We also enabled indirect branch tracking on OpenBSD where this is required
([#15122]). On other systems it's opt in via compiler flags:

- `-Dcf-protection=branch` for x86_64
- `-Dcf-protection=return` for x86_64
- `-Dcf-protection=full` for x86_64
- `-Dbranch-protection=bti` for aarch64

_Thanks  [@ysbaddaden]_

#### More portable `Process::Status`

The `Process::Status` type was originally based on Unix conventions and
later expanded for more portable semantics.  There were however still a couple
small insufficiencies for portability which we have now addressed.

- [`Process::Status#exit_status`] is deprecated ([#8647]) to avoid confusion with
  [`#exit_code`].  Its replacement [`#system_exit_status`] ([#15296]) returns the
  platform-specific exit status.  [`#exit_reason`] and [`#exit_code`] are better
  alternatives for portable code, though.
- Fixed [`Process::Status#exit_code`] to raise when the status is abnormal instead
  of returning an incorrect success code ([#15241]).  [`#exit_code?`] is a
  non-raising alternative ([#15247]).
- We aligned [`Process::Status#signal_exit?`] to now consider [`Signal::STOP`]
  (`0x7e`) a signal, in concordance with  [`#exit_signal`] ([#15289]) and added
  [`#exit_signal?`] ([#15284]) as a non-raising variant of the latter.
- [`Process::Status#to_s`] now prints unknown signals correctly ([#15280]).
  On Windows, it prints the name of known status constants ([#15283]) and
  formats large values in hexadecimal ([#15285]).
- [`Process::Status#normal_exit?`] was redefined on Windows to align with
  [`ExitReason::Normal`] ([#15255], [#15267]) and [`#abnormal_exit?`] is a shortcut
  for the inverse ([#15266]).

_Thanks  [@straight-shoota]_

### Windows

Our Windows efforts made a big step forward with adding MinGW-W64 and MSYS2 as
alternative compiler toolchains.  This required a bit of work for the compiler
tooling and to cleanly separate toolchain and OS portability.  These targets
enable cross-compilation for Windows binaries from Unix systems.

And with the implementation of context switch ([#15155]) we're also making good
progress for Windows on ARM.

This adds three new [Tier 3 targets](https://crystal-lang.org/reference/1.15.0/syntax_and_semantics/platform_support.html)
`x86_64-windows-gnu`, `aarch64-windows-msvc`, and `aarch64-windows-gnu`.

_Thanks  [@HertzDevil]_

### Compiler

The compiler emits position dependent code for embedded targets (`eabi`) ([#15174]).

_Thanks  [@RX14]_

### Compiler tools

We enabled some pending formatter features which had been available as opt-in
for a while ([#14718]). These are likely to cause changes in a lot of code bases,
so we collected a bunch of them to activate in a single release.
These changes are backwards-compatible with the formatter from 1.14.1.

The `crystal unreachable` tool has a new `codecov` formatter ([#15059]).

_Thanks  [@Blacksmoke16]_

### Dependency Updates

We updated the bindings for LibreSSL, enabling a bunch of new functions ([#15177]).

_Thanks  [@straight-shoota]_

### Shards 0.19.0

The bundled shards release was updated to [0.19.0](https://github.com/crystal-lang/shards/releases/tag/v0.19.0).

This new shards release brings some small improvements, most notably
it forwards ARGV unmodified to subcommands ([#631]), and supports Codeberg as a
git resolver ([#656]).

_Thanks [@luislavena] and [@miry]_

### Deprecations

- [`Process::Status#exit_status`]: Use [`#exit_reason`], [`#exit_code`], or [`#system_exit_status`] instead ([#8647])
  (more details in [_More portable `Process::Status`_](#more-portable-processstatus)).

---

> **THANKS:**
> We have been able to do all of this thanks to the continued support of [84codes](https://www.84codes.com/) and every other [sponsor](/sponsors).
> To maintain and increase the development pace, donations and sponsorships are
> essential.  [OpenCollective](https://opencollective.com/crystal-lang) is
> available for that.
>
> Reach out to [crystal@manas.tech](mailto:crystal@manas.tech)
> if you’d like to become a direct sponsor or find other ways to support Crystal.
> We thank you in advance!

[84codes]: https://www.84codes.com/
